the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu
so yesterday we saw how to define double
integrals and how to start computing
them in terms of X and Y
coordinates Okay so we've defined the
double
integral of a region in plane of a
function f of XY da
a ah you can't hear me okay uh is the
sound working can you hear me at the
back
now can we make the sound
louder does this work and people are not
hearing me the back is it
better okay people are still saying make
it louder uh is it better okay great
thanks
so okay that's not an excuse to start
you know chatting with your friends
um okay so when we have a region in the
XY
plane and we have a function of X and Y
we are defining the double integral of f
over this
region by taking basically the sum of
values of a function everywhere in here
times the area element and the
definition actually is we split the
region into lots of tiny little pieces
we multiply the value of the function at
that point times the area of a little
piece and we sum that everywhere and
we've seen actually how to compute these
things
as iterated
integrals so
first integrating over Dy then over DX
or the other way
around
so one example that we did in particular
was to compute the double integral over
a quarter
dis quarter of a unit dis so that was
the region where X2 + y sare is less
than 1 and X and Y are positive of 1 - x
2us y^
Da and well hopefully I kind of
convinced you that we can do it using
enough trig and substitutions and so on
but it's not very
pleasant
and the reason for that is that using X
and Y coordinates here doesn't seem very
appropriate so in fact we can use polar
coordinates instead to compute this
double
integral
so remember that polar coordinates are
about replacing X and Y as coordinates
for a point in the plane by
instead R which is the distance from the
origin to our point and Theta which is
the angle measured counterclockwise from
the positive
x-axis okay so in terms of R and Theta
you have xal R cosine Theta y equal R
sin
thet
so the claim is we are able actually to
do double integrals in polar coordinates
we just have to learn how
two okay so just to draw a quick
picture when we were integrating in XY
coordinates in rectangular
coordinates we were slicing our region
by grid lines that were either
horizontal or vertical and we used that
to set up the iterated integral and we
said da became DX Dy or Dy
DX so now we are going to actually
integrate in terms of the Polar
coordinates R and
Theta so let's say we will
integrate in the order well R first and
then Theta that's the order that makes
the most sense usually when you do polar
coordinates so what does that mean it
means that we will first focus on a
slice where we fix the value of theta
and we'll let R vary so that means we
fix a direction we fix a ray out from
the origin in a certain direction and
we'll travel along this R and see which
part of it which values of R are in our
region okay so here it will be actually
pretty easy
because R will just well start at zero
and you'll have to stop when you
actually exit this quarter dis well
what's the equation of this Circle in
polar coordinates it's just Ral 1 so
we'll stop when R reaches
one okay what about Theta well the first
array that we might want to consider is
the one that goes along the xaxis that's
when theta equals zero and we'll stop
when Theta reaches pi/ 2 because we
don't care about the rest of the disc we
only care about the first
quadrant
okay so we'll stop at pi/
two now there's a there's a catch
FL which is that da is not drd Theta so
let me explain to you why okay so let's
say that we are slicing you know what it
means really is that we are cutting our
region into little
pieces that are the elementary you know
what corresponds to a small rectangle in
the XY coordinate system here would be
actually a little piece of
circle between a given radius R
and R plus Delta R and given an between
an angle Theta and theta plus Delta
Theta okay so I need to draw actually a
bigger picture of it because it
makes really hard to
read so let's say that I fix an angle
Theta and a slightly different one where
I've added the Delta
thet and let's say that I
have a radius
R and I add Delta R to it so then you
know I'll have a little piece of XY
plane that's in here
and I have to figure out what is its
area what is Delta a for this
guy well let's see this guy actually if
you know my Delta R and Delta Theta are
small enough it will almost look like a
rectangle it's rotated but it's
basically a rectangle I mean these sides
of course are curvy but you know if
they're short enough it's almost
straight so the area here should be this
length times that
length well what's this length that one
is easy it's Delta
R okay
what about that length well it's not
Delta Theta it's something slightly
different it's a piece of a circle of
radius R corresponding to angle Delta
Theta so it's R Delta
Theta so times R Delta
Theta okay so that means now even if we
shrink things and take smaller and
smaller Rion da
is going to be r d r d
Theta okay so that's very important
thing to remember when you integrate in
polar
coordinates you just set up your bounds
in terms of R and Theta but you replace
da by Rd D Theta not just d d
Theta and then of course we have some
function that we're integrating let's
say that I called that thing f
then it's the same F that I put up here
oops so concretely how do I do it
here well my function f was given as you
know 1 - x - y^ 2 and I like to switch
that to Polar coordinates I want to put
R and Theta in
there well I have formulas for x and y
in polar coordinates so I could just
replace you know x 2 r cosine sare
Theta y^ 2 r sin sare Theta and that
works just fine but maybe you can
observe that this is
actually you know this is X2 + y^2 it's
just the square of a distance from the
origin so that's just R squ okay that's
a useful thing you know you don't
strictly need it but it's much faster if
you see this right away saves you you
know writing down a sign and a cosine
so now we just end up with the integral
from 0 to Pi / 2 integral from 0 to 1 of
1- R 2 r d r d
Theta now if I want to compute this
integral so let's first do the inner
integral
so if I integrate r - R Cub I will get
r^ 2 / 2 - R 2 sorry R 4 four between Z
and
one then I will integrate the
Theta so what is this equal to well for
Ral 1 you get 12 minus a quarter that's
going to be just a quarter and when you
plug zero you get zero so it's the
integral from 0 to Pi / 2
of 1 qu D Theta and that just integrates
to a quarter of Pi / 2 which is pi/
okay so that's a lot easier than the way
we did it
yesterday now well here we were lucky
okay I mean usually you will switch to
Polar coordinates either because the
region is easier to set up here it's
indeed easier to set up because see the
balance became very simple we don't have
that square root of 1- X anymore or
because the integrant becomes much
simpler here our function while it's not
very complicated in X Y coordinates but
it's even simpler in our feta
coordinates so here we were very lucky
um in general you know there's maybe a
trade-off maybe it will be easier to set
up the bounds but maybe the function
will become harder because it will have
all these signs and cosines in it if our
function had been just
x x is very easy in XY coordinates here
it becomes R cosine Theta that means you
will have a little bit of trick to do in
the integral not a very big one but you
know you know not a very complicated
integral but imagine you know it could
get potentially much
harder okay so anyway that's double
integrals in polar coordinates and the
way that you set up bounds in general
is you in so in 99% of the cases you
will integrate over R first so what you
will do is you will look for a given
Theta what are the bounds for R to be in
the region what is the portion of myay
that's in the given region and then you
will put the bounce for Theta but
conceptually it's the same as before
just instead of slicing horizontally or
vertically we slice
radially okay so we'll do more examples
in a bit
uh any questions about this of the
general
method yes you
say ah yes so that's a very good
question okay yes why do I measure the
length inside instead of outside uh oops
which one which one do I want this
one so here I I said this side is R
Delta Theta I could have said actually R
Delta Theta is the length here here it's
slightly more it's r r plus Delta R *
Delta Theta but you know if Delta R is
very small compared to R then that's
almost the same thing and this is an
approximation anyway so I took this one
because it gives me the simpler
formula
um if you want if you take the limit as
Delta R tends to zero then the two
things become the same
anyway okay the
length you know whether you put r or R
plus Delta R in here doesn't matter
anymore if you imagine that you know
this guy is infinitely small then really
the lengths become the
same okay we'll also see another another
proof of this formula using changes of
variables uh next week but I mean
hopefully this is at least slightly
convincing okay more question
questions
no okay so let's
see so we've seen how to compute double
integrals I have to tell you what
they're good for as
well so the definition we saw yesterday
and motivation was in terms of finding
volumes okay but that's not going to be
our main preoccupation because
you know Finding volumes is fun but it's
not all varies to life and you know now
I mean you know you're doing single
integrals when you do single integrals
it's usually not to find the area of
some region of a plane it's for
something else
usually okay so the way we actually
think of a double integral is really as
summing the values of a function all
over this region so we can use that to
get information about maybe the region
or about the average value of a function
in that region and so on so
let's think about various uses of double
integrals so the first
one that I will mention is actually
something you thought maybe you could do
with the simple integral with a single
integral but it's useful very often to
do it as a double integral it's to find
the area of a given
region Okay so give you you know some
region in the
plane and you want to know just its
area so in various cases you could set
this up as a simple as a single integral
but often it could be useful to set it
up as a double integral so how do you
express the area as a double integral
well the area of this region is the sum
of the areas of all the little pieces so
it means you want to sum one da over the
entire region
okay so the
area of R is the double integral over R
of the function
one
that's
so one way to think about it if you're
really still attached to the idea of
double integral the volume you know what
this measures is the volume below the
graph of a function one the graph of a
function one is just a horizontal plane
at height one so what you'll be
measuring would be the volume of a prism
or uh with base R and height
one and the volume of that of course
would be base times height so it would
just be the area of R
again but we don't actually even need to
think about it that way really what
we're doing is we're summing da over the
entire
region okay a related thing we can do so
imagine that Lally this is you know uh
some object some physical object and
it's got to be a flat object because
we're just dealing with things in the
plane so far but you know you have a
flat metal plate or something and you
would like to know it's its mass well
its mass is the sum of the masses of
everything every single little
piece and so you would get that by
integrating the density the density for
a flat object would be the area sorry
the mass per unit area
okay so we can get the mass
of
a well
flat object with
density so let's use Delta for
density which is the mass per unit
area
so each little piece of your object will
have a mass which will be just the
density times its ARA for each small
piece and you will get the total mass by
summing these things
so the mass will be the double integral
of the density times the area
element now if it has constant density
you know if it's always the same
material then of course you could just
take the density out and you will get
density times the total area you if you
know that it's always the same
material but if actually it has varying
density maybe because it's some metallic
thing but with various metal so with
varying thickness or something then you
can still get the mass by integrating
the
density
okay so I me of course looking at flat
objects might be a little bit strange
that's because we're only doing double
integrals so far
in a few weeks we'll be doing triple
integrals and then we'll be able to do
solids in
space uh but you know one thing at a
time
okay
so okay another useful application is to
find the average value of some quantity
in a
region
so what does it mean to take the average
value of some function f in this region
R well you know what's the average of
you know a finite set of data for
example if I ask you to compute your
average score on 1802 problem sets you
would just take the scores add them up
and divide by the number of problem
sets uh what if there's infinitely many
things because you know say ask you to
find the average temperature in this
room well you would have to measure the
temperature everywhere and then add all
of these together and divide by the
number of data points but depending on
how careful you are actually there's
potentially infinitely many points to
look at so the mathematical way to
define the average over a continuous set
of data is that you actually integrate
the function of the entire set set of
data and then you divide by the size of
the sample which is just the area of the
region okay so in fact the
average of f so the notation we'll use
usually for that is f with a bar on top
okay to tell us the average F that would
be so we said we'll take the integral of
f and will
divide by the area of the
region okay you can really think of it
as the sum of the values of f everywhere
divided by the number of points in
everywhere and so that's an average
where everything is actually equally
likely you know that's a uniform average
where all the points in the region all
the little pieces of the Orion are
equally likely but maybe if you want to
do say an average over some solid with
variable density or if you want to
somehow give more importance to certain
parts than two others then you could
actually do a weighted
average so what's a weighted average
well you know in the case of taking the
average of your problem sets if I tell
you while problem set one is worth twice
as much as the others then you would
count twice that score in the sum and
then you would divide you would count it
as two of course when you
divide so the weighted average is the
sum of the values but each weighted by a
certain coefficient and then you will
divide by the sum of the
weight so it's a bit the same idea as
when we you know replace area by some
mass that tells you how important a
given piece
is so we'll actually have a
density let's call it again that would
be
now well we'll see what we divide by but
what we will take is the
integral times of a function time the
density time the area
element because this would correspond to
the mass
element telling us how to weight the
various points of our region and then we
would divide by the total weight which
is the mass of the region so as defined
up there
okay so you know if a density is uniform
then of course the density gets out and
you know you can simplify and reduce to
that if all the points are equally
likely okay so why is that important
well that's important for various
applications but one that you might have
seen in
physics we care about maybe where is the
center of mass of a given object okay so
the center of mass is basically the
point you know you would call that point
to be you know you would say that point
is right in the middle of the object but
of course if the object has a very
strange shape or if somehow part of it
is heavier than the rest then that takes
a very different
meaning so strictly speaking the center
of mass of a solid is the point where
you would have to concentrate all the
mass if you wanted it to behave
equivalently from the point of view of
mechanics if you are trying to do
translations of that object you know if
you are going to push that object that
would be really where you know where the
equivalent Point Mass would
lie the other way to think about it you
know if I have a flat object then the
center of mass is basically the point
where I would need to hold it so that
it's perfectly balanced you know and of
course I can't do this because I'm not
well whatever but you get the feeling I
mean the center of mass of this eraser
is somewhere in the middle
and so in principle that's where I would
have to put my finger for it to stay
well and it doesn't
work okay that's but that's where the
center of mass should be I think it's
should be in the
middle
so well maybe I shouldn't call this fre
I should call this maybe you know 2 a or
whatever it's CU it's really a special
case of the average
value so how do we find the center of
mass
of
a flat
object with density
Delta well so if you have your object in
the XY
plane then it's Center of mass will be
at positions that are actually just the
coordinates of the center of mass will
just be the weighted aages of X and Y on
the
solid okay so the center of mass will be
at a position that I will call xar Y Bar
and these are really just the averages
the average values of X and of Y in the
solid so just to give a formulas again
xar would be one over the mass
time the double integral of x time
density
D and same thing with
y y y
bar is the weighted average of the y
coordinate in your
region okay so you see if you take a
region that's symmetric and has uni from
density that will just give you the
center of the region but if the region
has a strange shape or if a density is
not homogeneous if parts of it are
heavier then you know you will get
whatever the weighted average will
be and that would be the point where
this think would be balanced if you were
trying to you know balance it on a pole
or on your
finger
okay
[Music]
okay any questions so far
NOP
yes uh no sorry no no so when you do I
mean so here I I set up this I didn't
set this up as an iterated integral yet
okay so here the function that I'm
integrating is x * Delta where Delta you
know the density will be given to me
maybe as a function of X and Y and then
I will integrate this da and da could
mean DX Dy could mean Dy DX could mean
Rd Rd Theta I will choose how to set it
up depending maybe on the shape of the
region you know if my solid is actually
just you know going to be round then I
might want to use polar coordinates if
it's a square I might want to use XY
coordinates if it's more complicated
well I will choose depending on how I
feel about
it yes
so yes so Delta Delta is the density
it's in general it's a function of X and
Y if you imagine that your solid you
know is not homogeneous then its density
will depend on which piece of it you're
looking at of course to compute this you
need to know the
density uh if you have a problem asking
you to find the center of mass of
something and you have no information
about the density assume it's uniform
you know take the density to be a
constant even take it to be one that's
even easier if you want I me you know
it's a general fact of math we don't
care about units so density you know if
density is constant we might as well
take it to be one and that just means
that our mass unit becomes the area
unit yes you
have that's a good question no I don't
think we could actually find the center
of mass in polar coordinates by finding
the average of r or the average of theta
see for example take a disk centered at
the origin okay well you know that the
center of mass should be at the origin
right but the average of R is certainly
not zero because R is positive
everywhere so that doesn't work you
cannot get the polar coordinates of the
center of mass just by taking the
average of R and the average of theta by
the way what's the average of theta you
know if you take Theta to go from 0 to 2
pi the average Theta will be Pi if you
take it to go fromus pi Pi the average
Theta will be zero so there's a problem
there so that that actually just doesn't
work um so we really have to compute xar
and Y bar but still we could compute
them you know we could set this up and
then switch to Polar coordinates to
evaluate this integral but we still be
Computing the average values of X and
Y
Okay
so next thing so we're basically re
exploring you know mechanics and motion
of solids here so the next thing is
moment of
inertia so just to remind you or in case
you somehow haven't seen it in physics
yet so the moment of inertia is
basically to rotation of a solid what
the mass is to translation okay in the
following sense Mass the mass of a solid
is what makes it hard to push
it you know how hard it is to throw
something is related to its mass how
hard it is to spin something on the
other hand is given by its moment of
inertia maybe I should write this down
so mass is how hard it
is to impart a translation motion to a
solid
so I'm using fancy words
today
and the moment of
inertia so the difference with the mass
is that moment of inertia is defined
about some
AIS okay so you choose an axis then you
will try to measure how hard it is to
spin your object around that axis for
example I can try to measure how hard it
is to spin this sheet of paper about an
axis that's in the center of it so I
would try to spin like that and see how
much effort I have to make well for a
sheet of paper not very much
but so that would measure the same thing
but it would be
rotation
motion about
vexes so maybe some of you know the
definition if not I'm going to try to
derive it again I'm sorry that it won't
be quite as detailed as the way you've
probably seen it in physics but you know
I'm not trying to replace your physics
teachers I'm sure they're doing a great
job
and
so you know what's the idea for the
definition to to find a formula for
moment of inertia so the idea is to
think about kinetic energy kinetic
energy is really what you know um you
know when you push something or when you
try to make it move you have to provide
some energy to it and then it has
kinetic energy and if you have the right
device then you can convert back that
kinetic energy into something
else
so if you try to look at the kinetic
energy of a point Mass so you have
something with mass m going at velocity
V well that will be 12 of the masstimes
the square of the speed okay hopefully
you've all seen that formula some time
before now let's say that instead of
just trying to push this Mass I'm going
to make it spin around something okay so
instead of
just somewhere maybe you know I will
have here the origin and I'm trying to
actually make it go around the
origin at a certain you know in a circle
at a certain angular
velocity so for a mass m at distance
R let's call R this
distance
and angular
velocity let's called the angular
velocity Omega I think that's what
physicists call it so remember the
angular velocity is just the rate of
change of the angle over time okay it's
def DT if you
want well what's theine energy now well
first we have to find out what's the
speed what's the speed well if we are
going on a circle of radius r at angular
velocity Omega that means that in unit
time we rotate by Omega and we go by a
distance of R * Omega okay
so the the actual speed is the radius
times the angular
velocity
and so the kinetic energy is 12 m v^ 2
which is 12 m r 2 Omega
s and so see by similarity with that
formula we can think of so here the
coefficient of v s is the mass and here
we'll say the co efficient of Omega squ
so this thing is the moment of
inertia that's how we def moment of
inertia okay now that's only for a point
mass and you know it's kind of fun to
spin just you know a small bowl but
maybe you'd like to spin actually a
larger
solid and try Define this moment of
inertia well the moment of inertia of a
solid will be just the sum of the
moments of inertia of all the little
pieces so what we'll do is we'll just
cut our solid into little chunks and
we'll sum this thing for each little
piece okay
so for a
solid with
density
Delta so each little piece has
mass which is the density times the
amount of area because it's equal
actually
what and the moment of inertia of that
small portion of the solid will be Delta
M the small masstimes r s the square of
a distance to the center to the axis
around which I'm
spinning
so that means if I sum this these things
together well so has moment of
inertia Delta M * R 2 which is R 2 * for
density
* Delta a and so I will be summing these
things
together and so the moment of
inertia about the origin will be the
double integral of r * time
da Okay
so
the
final formula for the moment of
inertia about the
origin is the double integral of the
region of r density
da or if you prefer if you're going to
do it in XY coordinates of course R
square becomes x square plus y^ s it's
the square of the distance from the
origin okay so when you integrate this
that tells you how hard it is to spin
that solid about the origin so the
motion that we try to do is we keep this
fixed and then we just
rotate around the origin well sorry
that's a pretty bad picture but
hopefully you get what I
mean
okay and then the rotational energy so
the name we use for that is is i z and
then the
rotational kinetic
energy is 12 time this moment of inertia
time the square of the angular
velocity so it's in this sense that this
replaces the mass for rotation
motions okay what about other kinds of
rotations so in particular here we've
been rotating things about just a point
in the plane what you could imagine also
is instead you have your
solid so what I've done so far is I've
skewered it this way and I'm rotating
around V AIS instead I could skewer it
through say the horizontal axis and and
then I could try to spin about the
horizontal axis so then it would you
know rotate in space in that direction
like
that
so let's say we do rotation about the
xaxis well the idea would still be the
same okay the moment of inertia for any
small piece of the solid would
its mass
element the square of the distance to
the axis because that will be the radius
of a trajectory if you take this point
here it's going to go on a circle like
that centered on the
x-axis so the radius will just be this
distance
here well what's this distance it's just
y or maybe absolute value of
y Okay so
distance to
xais is absolute value of y and what we
actually care about is the square of the
distance so that will just be y^
squ so the moment of inertia about the
x-
axis is going to be obtained by
integrating
y^2 times the mass
element okay it's slightly strange that
I have y in the inertia about the xaxis
but if you think about it y tells me how
far I am from the x-axis so how hard it
will be to spin around the
x-axis okay and I could do the same
about any other axis that I want just I
would have to sum the square of the
distance to the axis of
rotation okay so maybe I should do an
example
yes oh sorry same thing as above this TS
to the
x-axis because that's what we care about
right for the moment of inertia we want
the square of the distance to the axis
of
rotation okay so let's do an example
let's try to figure out if we have just
a uniform disc how hard it is to spin it
around its
Center okay so that shouldn't be very
hard to comp to figure out say that we
have a
dis
of radius
a and we want to rotate it about its
Center
and let's say that it's of uniform
density and let's take just the density
to be one so that you we don't really
care about the
density so what's the moment of inertia
of that well we have to integrate over
our
disk R 2 time the density which is 1
time
da okay what's R squ so you have here to
resist the urge to say oh the radius is
just a we know the radius is a uh no
it's not a because we're looking at
rotation of you know any point inside
this disc and when you're inside the dis
the distance to the origin is not a it's
less than a it's actually anything
between zero and
a okay so just you know point out a
pitfall R here is really a function on
this dis and we're going to integrate
that function don't plug I equals a just
yet okay what coordinates do we used to
compute this
integral we yeah probably polar
coordinates I mean unless you want to
repeat of what happened already with you
know X and Y so that will tell us we
want to integrate R stimes Rd D Theta
and the bounce for R well R will go from
0 to a no matter in which direction I go
from the origin if I fix
Theta R goes from Z to Ral a the part of
this Ray that lives inside the disc is
always from 0 to
a and Theta goes from well 0 to 2 pi for
example okay and now you can compute
this integral well I'll let you figure
it out but the inner integral becomes a
4 4 and the outer multiplies things by 2
pi so you get Pi a 4 over
two no yes
okay so that's how hard it is to spin
this disc now what
about instead of spinning it about the
center we decide actually to spin it
about a point on the
circumference so you know for example
think of a frisbee you know frisbee you
know it has this rim and so you can
actually try to make it rotate around
the point on the
circumference by holding it you know
near the r and spinning it there how
much harder is that than around the
center well we'll try to compute now the
moment of inertia about this point so we
have two options one is we keep the
system of coordinates centered here but
then the formula for distance to this
point becomes
harder the other option which is the one
I will choose is to change the
coordinates so that this point becomes
the
origin okay so let's do
that
[Music]
okay
so about a
point on the
what I would have to
do maybe is set up my region like
that you know now I I've moved the
origin so that it's on the circumference
of the disc and I will again try to find
the moment of inertia of this disc about
the
origin so it's still the double integral
of R2
da but now I want to find out how to set
up the
integral so I could try to use XY
coordinates and it would work or I can
use polar coordinates and actually it
works a little bit better that
way but both both are
doable so let's say I do it this way so
I have to figure out how to set up my
bounds right so what have bounds for
R well if I fix a value of
theta so it means I chose an angle here
and now I'm shooting a ray from the
origin in that
direction so I enter my region at Ral Z
but hasn't
changed question is where do I exit the
region so what is that
distance
okay so maybe you've seen it in
recitation maybe
not um
so let's see well actually I should have
written down the radius of the circle is
a so this distance here is 2
a okay
so if you draw this segment in here you
know that here you have a right
angle so you have a right triangle the
hypotenuse here has length 2 a this
angle is Theta well this length is 2
a cosine
Theta okay so the polar coordinates
equation of this circle passing through
the origin is Ral 2 a cosine
Theta so R will go from 0 to 2 a cosine
F okay that's the distance
here now what are the bounds for
Theta it's not quite 0 to 2 pi because
actually you see in this direction if I
shoot a in this direction I will never
meet my region so I have to
actually think a bit more well the the
directions in which I will actually hit
my circle are all the directions in the
right half of the
plane okay I mean of course if I shoot
very close to the axis you might think
oh I won't be in there but actually
that's not true because here the circle
is tangent to the axis so okay no matter
which direction I take I will still have
a little tiny
piece so the angle actually goes from
minus Pi / 2 to Pi /
2 so now if you compute that you will
get well the inner
integral will be R 4 4 between 0 and 2 a
cosine Theta which will turn out to be 4
a 4 cosine 4 Theta and now you will
integrate that from minus pi/ 2 to Pi /
2 and well that's again the evil
integral that we had yesterday so either
we remember the method from yesterday or
we remember from yesterday that actually
there's formulas in the notes to help
you so on home homework you can use
these formulas in the notes at the
beginning of section
3B there's formulas for these particular
kinds of integrals and that will end up
being three halves of Pi a to 4 so in
case you wanted to know it's three times
harder to spin a frisbe about a point on
circumference than around the center see
we got three times the moment of inertia
about the
center okay that's it have a nice
weekend